add a cookbook for multicomponents steinberger model (#5769)
geodynamics/aspect: cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/multicomponent_steinberger.md

`Compositional fields`. Please see [ASPECT forum discussion](https://community.geodynamics.org/t/there-is-a-problem-when-use-initial-temperature-model-adiabatic-half-space-cooling-with-number-of-composition-greater-than-1-ascii-model/3160/2) for more information.

The complete input file can be found in
[cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm](https://www.github.com/geodynamics/aspect/blob/main/cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm).

## Results

We run the model for 300 million years. A primary plume rise from the initial thermochemical anomaly to the base of the lithosphere after ~250 Myrs. The thermochemical plume penetrates the 410 km buoyancy barrier broadly and spreading out at ~410 km depth. Our model results are consistent with the results from {cite}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`. However, due to the mid-mantle viscosity hump ({numref}`fig:viscosity.multicompstn`) presents in our model but not in {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`, the radius of our plume rises much slower than the plumes in {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`. You may need to adjust the reference

> viscosity profile and/or increase the buoyancy flux of the initial thermochemical anomaly to get similar results from {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.

Reviewer: I would also add some additional text here that says something like:

"Also note that the cold downwellings that develop in this model push the initial dense layer at the base of the mantle into a pile of basaltic material. Since the existence of such a pile affects the formation of plumes, the first plume that rises represents a transient state of the model, and plumes that rise at later points in time might look different. For a research application model, one would want to run the model for a longer time and base interpretations on the dynamics of plumes after this initial transient phase."

I think your setup is great to teach a user how to use all of the features in ASPECT to make a model of a thermochemical plume, but we want to make sure that users know what the limitations are.

> viscosity profile and/or increase the buoyancy flux of the initial thermochemical anomaly to get similar results from {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.

Author: Thanks for rewording! I meant to say increasing initial volume and excess temperature. I have added the discussion about the limitations of this model setup.

The complete input file can be found in
[cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm](https://www.github.com/geodynamics/aspect/blob/main/cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm).

## Results

We run the model for 300 million years. A primary plume rises from the initial thermochemical anomaly to the base of the lithosphere after ~250 Myrs. The thermochemical plume penetrates the 410 km buoyancy barrier broadly and spreads out at ~410 km depth. Our model results are consistent with the results from {cite}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`. However, due to the mid-mantle viscosity hump ({numref}`fig:viscosity.multicompstn`) present in our model but not in {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`, the plume in our model rises much slower than the plumes in {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`. In addition, since this is a 2D model whereas the {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015` models are axisymmetric around the plume center, the plume tail in our model can entrain less material and is therefore much thinner. You may need to adjust the reference

> viscosity profile, change the model geometry to 3D, and/or adjust the buoyancy (by changing the size of temperature) of the initial thermochemical anomaly to get similar results to {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
viscosity profile, change the model geometry to 3D, and/or adjust the buoyancy (by changing the size or temperature) of the initial thermochemical anomaly to get similar results to {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.
```

> Also note that the cold downwellings that develop in this model push the initial dense layer at the base of the mantle into a pile of basaltic material, and the structure of thermochemical pile continue to evolve as the model runs. They can resemeble the processes that subducted slabs sweep the accumulated basaltic material into a pile and may eventually drive new plumes to rise from the edge of the pile. New plumes may also originate from random locations either inside or outside the pile. The first plume that rises only represents a transient state of the model, and plumes that rise at later points in time might look different. For a research application model to fully understand the dynamic of thermochemical plumes, one may want to run the model for a longer time in a full spherical shell. The interpretations should be based on on the dynamics of plumes after the initial transient phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also note that the cold downwellings that develop in this model push the initial dense layer at the base of the mantle into a pile of basaltic material, and the structure of thermochemical pile continues to evolve as the model runs. They can resemble the process of subducted slabs sweeping the accumulated basaltic material into a pile and may eventually drive new plumes to rise from the edges of the pile. New plumes may also originate from random locations either inside or outside the pile. The first plume that rises only represents a transient state of the model, and plumes that rise at later points in time might look different. For a research application model to fully understand the dynamics of thermochemical plumes, one may want to run the model for a longer time in a full spherical shell. The interpretations should be based on the dynamics of plumes after the initial transient phase.
```

material properties will then be averaged based on the mass/volume fractions
of the individual compositions.

```{literalinclude} lookup.part.prm
```

Our initial composition setup is similar to Supplementary Figure 2b in
{cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.  By varying the fraction of the compositional
field, we can prescribe a basal layer with 50% basaltic materials at the CMB and
gradually decrease to 15% at 500 km above the CMB. The percentage of the basaltic
materials is determined by a linear function:
```{math}
f(radius) = c + k * radius,
```
where $k = -7e-7 m^{-1}$ is the slope of the line, $c = 2.9367$, and $radius$
is the distance from the center to a given point in $m$. You can modify $k$
and $c$ to prescribe a different distribution of basaltic materials in the basal
layer. On top of the basal layer, we prescribe an 400-km-radius circular
compositional anomaly with 15% of basaltic materials if it is above the basal
layer. The domain where the anomaly overlaps with basal layer have the same
composition as the basal layer. All the other domains in the should be 100%
pyrolitic ({numref}`fig:compfield.multicompstn`:left).

> ```{literalinclude} comp.setup.prm

Author: I have removed the composition boundary condition. I added it in because I was testing the periodic sides boundary condition.

expression to the adiabatic temperature profile.

We use the half-space cooling model to set up a 100 Ma top boundary layer and
a 3.5 Ga bottom boundary layer. We use `Function` to prescribe a circular
thermal anomaly at the same position with the same size as the compositional
anomaly. The temperature of theanomaly is the maximum value between 400 K and
the temperature difference between the actual temperature profile and the ambient
mantle adiabat. This setup would produce a thermal anomaly with an excess
temperature of 400 K that deviates from the bottom thermal boundary layer smoothly
({numref}`fig:temperature.multicompstn`:left).
```{literalinclude} temperature.setup.prm
```
Since we use a set of arbitrary heat capacity, density, and thermal conductivity to
calculate the thermal diffusivity (function constant `kappa`) and the heat capacity
and density are obtained from the look-up table, you should choose the values that
are representative for your model. You can do it by first setting `End time = 1`
and running the model. You then find the representative heat capacity and density
values for your model from the visualization output, and the thermal conductivity is

> set to be 1.5 K/m in the `material model`. Other than `kappa`, the other constants

Author: Change to use the default p-T-dependent thermal conductivity.

This function has a expression of `0` so it would not affect the initial temperature
field but it should have the same number of terms as the `Number of fields` set in the
`Compositional fields`. Please see [ASPECT forum discussion](https://community.geodynamics.org/t/there-is-a-problem-when-use-initial-temperature-model-adiabatic-half-space-cooling-with-number-of-composition-greater-than-1-ascii-model/3160/2) for more information.

The complete input file can be found in
[cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm](https://www.github.com/geodynamics/aspect/blob/main/cookbooks/multicomponent_steinberger/doc/steinberger_thermochemical_plume.prm).

## Results

We run the model for 300 million years. Plumes from the initial thermochemical
anomaly as well as from the thermal boundary layer. However, no plumes has risen
up to the base of the lithosphere due to the mid-mantle viscosity hump ({numref}`fig:viscosity.multicompstn`)
and the low buoyancy flux of the plume. You may need to adjust the reference
viscosity profile and/or decrease the percentage of basaltic materials within the

> initial thermochemical anomaly to get similar results from {cite:t}`Dannberg:Sobolev:2015`.

Author: I changed the excess temperature to 450 K and plume rise up to the base of the lithosphere at ~250 Ma. I think the boundary layer rising because of the dripping slab. I reduced the age of the surface boundary layer to 50 Ma and the basal layer looks more reasonable now.
